Editorial review (#80)
iov-one/docs: docs/weave-tutorial/03-codec.md

---
id: codec
title: Codec
sidebar_label: Codec
---

> [PR#1](https://github.com/iov-one/tutorial/pull/1): _Create order book models_

> Weave defines `Marshaller` and `Persistent` interface standards. These interfaces are automatically implemented by any code autogenerated by protoc from protobuf files, and we recommend using .proto files to specify the serialization format for any persistent data in our application (internal state as well as transactions and messages). However, if you have never worked with protobuf, this might be a bit of a challenge, so we explain a workflow that we use in weave based projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Weave defines `Marshaller` and `Persistent` interface standards. These interfaces are automatically implemented by any code autogenerated by protoc from protobuf files, and we recommend using .proto files to specify the serialization format for any persistent data in our application (internal state as well as transactions and messages). However, if you have never worked with protobuf, this might be a bit of a challenge, so here we explain a workflow that we use in weave- based projects.
```

## Create Codec file

> First imagine the shape of your classes. The product of your imagination will be called `Codec`. And the language of expressing shape of the classes is: [proto3](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3). There are several different `int encodings`, `byte slices`, `strings`, and nested structures. And fields may be repeated. So forget complex types with methods now and just focus on the actual data structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First imagine the shape of your classes. The product of your imagination will be called `Codec`. And the language of expressing the shape of the classes is: [proto3](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3). There are several different `int encodings`, `byte slices`, `strings`, and nested structures; and fields may be repeated. So it is best to forget complex types with methods and instead focus on the actual data structure.
```

> Codec is the first component that needs to be designed. Keep in mind that this part is the most important since the whole module will depend on _codec_. Codec resembles  _model_ in mvc pattern. Yet codec not only defines the model representation but marshalling/unmarshalling and interactions with messages. Codec defines the whole application state models and more. On this article, we would not go as far as explaining every proto message. One example for each message and state would be enough. Furthermore, if you want to see all the implementation, you can check out [tutorial](https://github.com/iov-one/tutorial/blob/master/x/orderbook/codec.proto)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Codec is the first component that needs to be designed. Keep in mind that this part is the most important as the whole module will depend on _codec_. Codec resembles  _model_ in mvc pattern; however. codec not only defines the model representation but also marshalling/unmarshalling and interactions with messages. Codec defines the whole application state models and more. In this article, we will not go as far as explaining every proto message - one example for each message and state should be enough. Furthermore, if you want to see all the implementation, you can check out our [tutorial](https://github.com/iov-one/tutorial/blob/master/x/orderbook/codec.proto).
```

## State

> In the previous section, we explained how to define your domain thus attributes if models. Here `Trade` is defined as proto message. The [x/codec.proto](https://github.com/iov-one/tutorial/blob/master/x/orderbook/codec.proto#L75-L88) file defines the `Trade` type rather simply, once you remove the comments, this is all that is left:

Reviewer: `I don't under the word 'thus' here - is it a correct?`

```protobuf
// Trade is a settled partial/full order
// We store these as independent entities to help with queries to map
// the prices over time. They are also referenced by the Orders, so we can
// see how much was fulfilled.
//

> // Ask and Bid tickers are "inherited" from the orderbook

Reviewer: `Need to standardize on orderbook or order book`

message Trade {
  weave.Metadata metadata = 1;
  bytes id = 2 [(gogoproto.customname) = "ID"];
  bytes order_book_id = 3 [(gogoproto.customname) = "OrderBookID"];
  bytes order_id = 4 [(gogoproto.customname) = "OrderID"];
  // Address of taker (this is an order that was instantly fulfilled)
  bytes taker = 5 [(gogoproto.casttype) = "github.com/iov-one/weave.Address"];
  // Address of maker (this is an order that was stored first before fulfillment)
  bytes maker = 6 [(gogoproto.casttype) = "github.com/iov-one/weave.Address"];
  // this is how much each side paid (they got the opposite one)
  coin.Coin maker_paid = 7;
  coin.Coin taker_paid = 8;
  // executed_at defines execution time of an order
  int64 executed_at = 9 [(gogoproto.casttype) = "github.com/iov-one/weave.UnixTime"];
}
```

> As you can see above, weave is heavily using `bytes` for identities, addresses, etc. At first glance, this might seem difficult to handle but if you take a look at [x/orderbook/bucket](https://github.com/iov-one/tutorial/blob/master/x/orderbook/bucket.go#L125) you can see it is useful for indexing and performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see above, weave is heavily using `bytes` for identities, addresses, etc. At first glance, this might seem difficult to handle but if you take a look at [x/orderbook/bucket](https://github.com/iov-one/tutorial/blob/master/x/orderbook/bucket.go#L125) you can see it is useful for indexing and performance.
```

Note that the package defined in the protobuf file must match the package name used by the Go language code in the same directory.

> You can also import types from one proto file into another. Make sure to use the full github path so that the generated go code has properly set imports. The package name above is also used as a namespace for the imported protobuf definitions. This is how [x/cash](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/blob/master/x/cash/codec.proto) creates a wallet that contains an array of tokens of different currencies.

Reviewer: `In Line 47 Go is initial capped but here it is all lowercase.`

> You can also import types from one proto file into another. Make sure to use the full github path so that the generated go code has properly set imports. The package name above is also used as a namespace for the imported protobuf definitions. This is how [x/cash](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/blob/master/x/cash/codec.proto) creates a wallet that contains an array of tokens of different currencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also import types from one proto file into another. Make sure to use the full github path so that the generated Go code has properly set imports. The package name above is also used as a namespace for the imported protobuf definitions. This is how [x/cash](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/blob/master/x/cash/codec.proto) creates a wallet that contains an array of tokens of different currencies.
```

> 2 critical points needs to be explained in state models and messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two critical points needs to be explained in state models and messages.
```

> Firstly, You must have noticed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, you must have noticed:
```

```protobuf
weave.Metadata metadata = 1;
```

`weave.Metadata` enables upgrading the code on chain without downtime. It is required if you want to use any [weave provided extensions](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/tree/master/x). [Migrations](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/tree/v0.20.0/migration) package will be explained in more detail in further sections.

> The second one is how the magic `ID` field works. This will be explained in [Models](weave-tutorial/04-models.md) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Secondly, note how the magic `ID` field works. This will be explained in [Models](weave-tutorial/04-models.md) section.
```

  bytes order_book_id = 3 [(gogoproto.customname) = "OrderBookID"];
  // Offer is how much will be paid
  coin.Coin offer = 4;
  // Price is how much is requested for each unit of the offer token
  Amount price = 5;
}
```

Noticed `(gogoproto.casttype)` and `(gogoproto.customname)`?

```protobuf
bytes trader = 2 [(gogoproto.casttype) = "github.com/iov-one/weave.Address"];
```

`(gogoproto.casttype)` indicates this field will be cast to `weave.Address`. Compiled codec.pb.go field:

```go
// Address of trader that created order (ad gets paid from it)
    Trader      github_com_iov_one_weave.Address `protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=trader,proto3,casttype=github.com/iov-one/weave.Address" json:"trader,omitempty"`
```

```protobuf
bytes order_book_id = 3 [(gogoproto.customname) = "OrderBookID"];
```

`(gogoproto.customname)` indicates this field will be named as `OrderBookID`. Compiled codec.pb.go field:

```go
OrderBookID []byte `protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=order_book_id,json=orderBookId,proto3" json:"order_book_id,omitempty"`
```

Without it we would get:

```go
OrderBookId []byte `protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=order_book_id,json=orderBookId,proto3" json:"order_book_id,omitempty"`
```

> As you can see above we define necessary fields that will be used by `handler` to interact with application state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see above, we define necessary fields that will be used by `handler` to interact with application state.
```

## Compiling Proto Files

> To compile protobuf files, you need to have the [protoc](https://github.com/google/protobuf#protocol-compiler-installation) binary installed and a language-specific translator (gogo-protobuf in this case). This can be a bit of a pain, especially the first time, so the default **weave-starter-kit** [Makefile](https://github.com/iov-one/weave-starter-kit/blob/master/Makefile) contains helpers for you.

Reviewer: `Is the word 'helpers' correct here? Is it a technical term or do you mean something like 'helpful hints'?`

Author: It is a technical word

> After defining your state and messages run `make protoc`. This script will download `prototool` docker image that is for making protooling easier) and compile codec.proto file `codec.pb.go` file.

Reviewer: `Are there two distinct terms here - prototool and protool?`

> Now we have scaffold of our application thanks to auto-generated *codec.pb.go* file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we have the scaffold of our application thanks to auto-generated *codec.pb.go* file.
```

## Using Autogenerated Structs

The first time through the above process may appear tedious, but once you get the hang of it, you just have to add a few lines to a _.proto_ file and type `make protoc`. Et voila! You have a bunch of fresh *.pb.go files that provide efficient, portable serialization for your code.

But how do you use those structs? Taking `Amount` from [x/codec.proto](https://orkunkl.github.com/iov-one/tutorial/blob/master/x/orderbook/codec.proto#L10-L23) as an example, we see a `x/codec.pb.go` file with `type Amount struct {...}` that closely mirrors the content of the codec.proto file, as well as many of methods. There are some auto-generated getters, which can be useful to fulfill interfaces or to query field of _nil_ objects without panicking. And then there are some (very long) **Marshal** and **Unmarshal** methods. These are the meat of the matter. They fulfill the Persistent interface and let us write code like this:

```go
orig := Amount{Whole: 123, franctional: 2}
bz, err := orig.Marshal()
parsed := Amount{}
err = parsed.Unmarshal(bz)
```

> This is fine, but what happens when I want to add custom logic to my Amount struct, perhaps adding validation logic, or code to add two coins? Luckily for us, go allows you two write methods for your structs in any file in the same package. That means that we can just inherit the struct definition and all the serialization logic and just append the methods we care about. [x/amount.go](https://github.com/iov-one/tutorial/blob/master/x/orderbook/amount.go) is a great example of extending the functionality, with code like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is fine, but what happens when I want to add custom logic to my Amount struct, perhaps adding validation logic, or code to add two coins? Luckily for us, Go allows you two write methods for your structs in any file in the same package. That means that we can just inherit the struct definition and all the serialization logic and just append the methods we care about. [x/amount.go](https://github.com/iov-one/tutorial/blob/master/x/orderbook/amount.go) is a great example of extending the functionality, with code like:
```

```go
// IsPositive returns true if the value is greater than 0
func (a *Amount) IsPositive() bool {
    return a.Whole > 0 ||
        (a.Whole == 0 && a.Fractional > 0)
}

// IsNegative returns true if the value is less than 0
func (a *Amount) IsNegative() bool {
    return a.Whole < 0 ||
        (a.Whole == 0 && a.Fractional < 0)
}
```

This is a productive workflow and I recommend trying it out. You may find it doesn’t work for you and you can try other approaches, like copying the protobuf generated structs into some custom-written structs you like and then copying back into protobuf structs for serialization. You can also try playing with special [protobuf extensions](https://github.com/gogo/protobuf/blob/master/extensions.md) flags in your protobuf files to shape the auto-generated code into the exact shape you want.

## Notes About oneof

> **oneof** is a powerful feature to produce union/sum types in your protobuf structures. For example, you may have a public key which may be one of many different algorithms and can define cases for each, which can be switched upon in runtime. We also use this for the transaction to enumerate a set of possible messages that can be embedded in the transaction. A transaction may have any one of them and serialize and deserialize properly. Type-safety is enforced in compile-time and we can switch on the kind on runtime. (Example from [bcp-demo](https://github.com/iov-one/bcp-demo/blob/master/app/codec.proto)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**oneof** is a powerful feature to produce union/sum types in your protobuf structures. For example, you may have a public key which may be one of many different algorithms and can define cases for each, which can be switched on in runtime. We also use this for the transaction to enumerate a set of possible messages that can be embedded in the transaction. A transaction may have any one of them and serialize and deserialize properly. Type-safety is enforced in compile-time and we can switch on the kind at runtime. (Example from [bcp-demo](https://github.com/iov-one/bcp-demo/blob/master/app/codec.proto)):
```

```protobuf
oneof sum {
  cash.SendMsg send_msg = 1;
  namecoin.CreateTokenMsg new_token_msg = 2;
  namecoin.SetWalletNameMsg set_name_msg = 3;
  escrow.CreateMsg create_escrow_msg = 4;
  escrow.ReleaseMsg release_escrow_msg = 5;
  escrow.ReturnMsg return_escrow_msg = 6;
  escrow.UpdatePartiesMsg update_escrow_msg = 7;
}
```

> The only problem is that the generated code is ugly to some people’s eyes. This lies in the fact that there is no clean way to express sum types in Go, and you have to force an interface with private methods to close the set of possible types. Although some people have been so revolted by this code that they preferred to [write their own serialization library](https://github.com/tendermint/go-amino "go-amino"), I would suggest just taking the breath and getting to know it. Here are the relevant pieces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only problem is that, to some people, the generated code is ugly. This derives from the fact that there is no clean way to express sum types in Go, and you have to force an interface with private methods to close the set of possible types. Although some people have been so revolted by this code that they preferred to [write their own serialization library](https://github.com/tendermint/go-amino "go-amino"), I would suggest just holding your breath and getting to know it. Here are the relevant pieces:
```

```go
type Tx struct {
    // msg is a sum type over all allowed messages on this chain.
    //
    // Types that are valid to be assigned to Sum:
    //  *Tx_SendMsg
    //  *Tx_CreateTokenMsg
    //  *Tx_SetNameMsg
    //  *Tx_CreateMsg
    //  *Tx_ReleaseMsg
    //  *Tx_ReturnMsg
    //  *Tx_UpdateEscrowMsg
    Sum isTx_Sum `protobuf_oneof:"sum"`
...
}

type isTx_Sum interface {
    isTx_Sum()
    MarshalTo([]byte) (int, error)
    Size() int
}

type Tx_SendMsg struct {
    SendMsg *cash.SendMsg `protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=send_msg,json=sendMsg,oneof"`
}
type Tx_CreateTokenMsg struct {
    CreateTokenMsg *namecoin.CreateTokenMsg `protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=new_token_msg,json=newTokenMsg,oneof"`
}
```

> We now have some intermediate structs that give us a layer of indirection in order to enforce the fact we can now securely switch over all possible `tx.Sum` fields, with [code like this](https://github.com/iov-one/bcp-demo/blob/master/app/tx.go#L33-61):

Reviewer: `I don't understand the word indirection`

Author: I feel `redirection` would fit best in that case
